blog: Add 6.19 progress report (#109)
AsahiLinux/AsahiLinux.github.io: content/blog/2026/02/15-progress-report-6-19.md

being fixed specifically to enable their use on Apple Silicon devices running Linux. We
are immensely proud of what we have achieved and consider the project a resounding and
continued success.

And yet, there has remained one question seemingly on everyone's lips. Every announcement,
every upstreaming victory, every blog post has drawn this question out in one way or another.
It is asked at least once a week on IRC and Matrix, and we even occasionally receive
emails asking it.

"When will display out via USB-C be supported?"

"Is there an ETA for DisplayPort Alt Mode?"

"Can I use an HDMI adapter on my MacBook Air yet?"

Despite repeated polite requests to not ask us for specific feature ETAs, the questions
kept coming. In an effort to try and curtail this, we toyed with setting a "minimum"
date for the feature and simply doubling it every time the question was asked. This
very quickly led to the date being after the predicted heat death of the universe.
We fell back on a tried and tested response pioneered by id Software; DP Alt Mode will
be done when it's done.

And, well, it's done. Kind of.

> In December, Sven gave a talk at 39C3 recounting the Asahi story so far, our reverse

Reviewer: Would add a link to or embed https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3OAiOfCcYFM here just in case someone hasn't seen it yet

engineering process, and what the immediate future looks like for us. At the end, he
revealed that the slide deck had been running on an M1 MacBook Air, connected to
the venue's AV system via a USB-C to HDMI adapter!

At the same time, we quietly pushed the [fairydust](https://github.com/AsahiLinux/linux/tree/fairydust)

> branch to our downstream Linux tree. This branch is the culmination of years of hard work from Sven and Janne,

Reviewer 2: and marcan

who have been tirelessly wrangling the fragile and complicated USB and display stacks
on this platform. Getting a display signal out of a USB-C port on Apple Silicon involves
four distinct hardware blocks; DCP[^1], DCPXBAR[^2], ATCPHY[^3], and ACE[^4]. These four pieces of hardware
each required reverse engineering, a Linux driver, and then a whole lot of convincing to
play nicely with each other.

All of that said, there is still work to do. Currently, the fairydust branch "blesses"
a specific USB-C port on a machine for use with DisplayPort, meaning that multiple
USB-C displays is still not possible. There are also some quirks regarding both cold
and hot plug of displays. Moreover, some users have reported that DCP does not properly
handle certain display setups, variously exhibiting incorrect or oversaturated colours,

> missing timing modes, and incorrect handling of tiled displays.

Reviewer 2: mishandling of tiled displays sound either more like user bugs or the display requiring DP-MST (then it should not work in macOS)

been missing are Devicetrees for each machine, as well as patches to our Linux kernel
drivers to support M3-specific hardware quirks and changes from M2. Our intent was always
to get to fleshing this out once our existing patchset became more manageable, but with
the quiet hope that the groundwork being laid would excite a new contributor enough to
step up to the plate and attempt to help out. Well, we actually ended up with _three_
new contributors!

Between the three of them, [Alyssa Milburn (noopwafel)](https://noopwafel.net),
[Michael Reeves (integralpilot)](https://github.com/IntegralPilot), and [Shiz](https://github.com/Shiz),
with help from Janne, wrote some preliminary Devicetrees and found that a great deal of
hardware worked without any changes! Adding in some minor kernel changes for the NVMe and interrupt
controllers, Michael was able to [boot](https://www.reddit.com/r/AsahiLinux/comments/1qnddjd/m3_now_has_fedora_43_asahi_remix_working_with_kde/)
all the way to Plasma on an M3 MacBook Air!

In fact, the current state of M3 support is about where M1 support was when we released
the first Arch Linux ARM based beta; keyboard, touchpad, WiFi, NVMe and USB2 are all

> working. So that must mean we will have a release ready soon, right?

Reviewer 2: USB3 is working, this needs somewhere a stronger disclaimer that it's just on developer devices and requires changes to m1n1 and the downstream kernel which are not merged or don't exists as PR yet

Energy-Aware Scheduling, are quality of life features that are not likely to block a
release. Others, such as getting M3 devices supported in speakersafetyd, are release-blocking.

We don't expect it to take _too_ long to get M3 support into a shippable state, but
much as with everything else we do, we cannot provide an ETA and request that you
do not ask for one.

## Hertz so good
The 14" and 16" MacBook Pros have very nice displays. They have extremely accurate colour
reproduction, are extremely bright, _and_ are capable of a 120 Hz refresh rate. But
there's a catch.

On macOS, you cannot simply set these displays to 120 Hz and call it a day. Instead, Apple
hides refresh rates above 60 Hz behind their ProMotion feature, which is really just a
marketing term for bog standard variable refresh rate. One could be forgiven for assuming
that this is just a quirk of macOS, and that simply selecting the 120 Hz timing mode in
the DCP firmware would be enough to drive the panel at that refresh rate on Linux,
however this is not the case.

For reasons known only to Apple, DCP will refuse to drive the MacBook Pro panels higher

> than 60 Hz unless three specific fields in the page flip request struct are filled. We

Reviewer 2: "surface swap" let's use DCP's terminology for this

have known for some time that these fields were some form of timestamp, however we never
had the time to investigate them more deeply than that. Enter yet another new contributor!

[Oliver Bestmann](https://github.com/oliverbestmann) took it upon himself to get 120 Hz
working on MacBook Pros, and to that end looked into the three timestamps. Analysing traces
from macOS revealed them to count upward in XNU ticks, which are functionally identical to

> Linux jiffies. The timestamps are almost always exactly one frame apart, hinting that they

Reviewer 2: no, macOS uses the CPU's counter. jiffies are entirely a software concept and I won't mention it at all with "tickless" kernels these days

help with maintaining consistent frame pacing and minimising tearing, even when VRR is
not active.

At this stage, we are only interested in a consistent 120 Hz, not VRR. Since macOS
couples the two together, it is difficult to ascertain exactly what DCP expects us to
do for 120 Hz. Clearly the timestamps are required, but why? What does DCP do with them,
and what _exactly_ are they supposed to represent?

Sometimes, doing something stupid is actually very smart. Assuming that the timestamps
are only _meaningful_ for VRR, Oliver tried stuffing a static value of 120 into each
timestamp field. And it worked! Starting with kernel version 6.18.4, owners of 14" and
16" MacBook Pros are able to drive their builtin displays at 120 Hz.

Now of course, this solution is quite clearly jank. The presentation timestamps are
currently being set every time the KMS subsystem triggers an atomic state flush, and
they are definitely not supposed to be set to 120 on every page flip. While it
works for our use case, this solution is not upstreamable and precludes support for VRR,
which brings us nicely to our next topic.

## How do you solve a problem like DCP?

> The state of DCP support on Linux has historically been a bit of a mess. Display engine

Reviewer 2: What does the first sentence is supposed to mean? I don't understand it.

Author: That we do not really support all of its features and the driver is suboptimally designed, as is expanded upon in the sentences that follow.

every time the cursor moves, we can put the cursor on one of the display engine's overlay
planes and then command it to move that static framebuffer around the screen. The GPU is
only actively rendering when _content_ on the desktop needs redrawing, for example when
clicking on a button.

I shoehorned extremely limited support for this into the driver a while ago, and it
has been working nicely with Plasma 6's hardware cursor support. But we need to go
deeper.

DCP is capable of some very nifty features, some of which are absolutely
necessary for HDR and direct video scanout. Importantly for us, DCP can:

- Directly scan out semiplanar Y'CbCr framebuffers (both SDR and HDR)
- Take multiple framebuffers of differing colourspaces and normalise them to the
  connected display's colourspace before scanout
- Directly scan out compressed framebuffers created by AGX and AVD
- Automatically normalise mixed dynamic range content

All of these are tied to DCP's idea of a plane. Without significantly reworking
the driver's plane handling code, supporting any of these features would have
been impossible.

This isn't just academic code churn for the sake of possible future gain; it has

> already enabled us to fix oversaturated colours on the builtin MacBook displays,

Reviewer 2: This should mention, that user must not use ICC profiles with internal displays with kernel 6.18, for example if they used a Display P3 profile before

begin work on HDR support, and get (very broken and experimental) direct scanout

> and overlay support working with Plasma 6.5, including for Y'CbCr video sources.

Reviewer 2: What's broken and experimental? The overlay support works as expected and verified by my test program but I can't get kwin to use the single overlay for anything else than the cursor.

Author: kwin does not handle underlays properly and has multiple planes fighting over zposes. Some of this should be fixed with 6.7.

the display engine, bypassing the compositor entirely!

Planes are just one part of the puzzle, however. There is still much work to be
done cleaning up the driver and getting features like HDR into a shippable state.
Watch this space!

## Say cheese!
It's been quite a while since we shipped webcam support, and for _most_ users
it seems to have Just Worked! But not for _all_ users.

Users of certain webcam applications, most notable GNOME's Camera app, have been
reporting severe issues with webcam support since day one. Doing some initial
debugging on this pointed to it being a an issue with GNOME's app, however this
turned out not to be the case. The Asahi OpenGL driver was in fact not handling
planar framebuffer formats correctly. The ISP/webcam exports planar video
framebuffers via V4L2, which must then be consumed and turned into RGB framebuffers
for compositing with the desktop. Apps such as GNOME's Camera app do this with
the GPU, and thus were failing hard. Alyssa R. fixed this [half-asleep on the couch](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/mesa/mesa/-/merge_requests/38160),
in true Alyssa fashion.

So all good right? Nope! Hiding behind this bug in the GPU driver was yet another

> bug, this time in PipeWire. The code which determines the latency of a stream was

Reviewer 2: these were two related bugs. The first one was fixed by Robert Mader in https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/merge_requests/2582

assuming a rate numerator of 1, which is not always the case. With Apple Silicon
machines, the rate is expressed as 256/7680, which corresponds to 30 frames per
second. Since the numerator is not 1, the latency calculation was not being normalised,
and thus ended up so long that streams would crash waiting for data from PipeWire.
Janne submitted a [merge request](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/merge_requests/2636)
with a fix, which made it in to Pipewire 1.4.10. Surely _now_ we're all good right?
Right?

So, graphics programming is actually really hard. There were actually two more bugs
preventing things from working fully. One was a kernel driver issue with DMA-BUF
mappings for planar video formats, and another involved the Honeykrisp Vulkan driver
not handling planar video formats at all. Janne once again fixed both of these,

> and _now_ we're all good!

Reviewer 2: This misses to mention a DRM kernel log spam issue for every imported frame from the webcam

offloaded to the CPU rather than implemented as GPU code like with Vulkan. After
writing a shader to implement this, OpenGL copies now effectively saturate the
memory bus, which is about as good as one could hope for!

But why stop there? Buffer _copies_ are now fast, but what about clearing memory?
The Asahi driver was using Mesa's default buffer clearing helpers, which work
but cannot take advantage of hardware-specific optimisations. Janne also replaced
this with calls to AGX-optimised functions which take optimised paths for
memory-aligned buffers. This allows an M1 Ultra to clear buffers aligned to
16 byte boundaries at 355 GB/s.

But wait, there's more! While Vulkan copies were indeed faster than OpenGL copies,
they weren't as fast as they could be. Once again, we were neglecting to use our
AGX-optimised routines for copying aligned buffers. Fixing this gives us some pretty
hefty performance increases for such buffers, ranging from 30% faster for 16 KiB
buffers to more than twice as fast for buffers 8 MiB and larger!

## More conferences
Sven, Neal and Davide met up at FOSDEM in Belgium last month. Additionally, Davide

> will once again be hosting an Asahi demo system at Meta's booth at @SCALE Systems

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
will once again be hosting an Asahi demo system at Meta's booth at [SCaLE](https://www.socallinuxexpo.org/scale/23x)
```

(It's just "SCaLE", not "SCALE Systems and Reliability").

being fixed specifically to enable their use on Apple Silicon devices running Linux. We
are immensely proud of what we have achieved and consider the project a resounding and
continued success.

And yet, there has remained one question seemingly on everyone's lips. Every announcement,
every upstreaming victory, every blog post has drawn this question out in one way or another.
It is asked at least once a week on IRC and Matrix, and we even occasionally receive
emails asking it.

"When will display out via USB-C be supported?"

"Is there an ETA for DisplayPort Alt Mode?"

"Can I use an HDMI adapter on my MacBook Air yet?"

Despite repeated polite requests to not ask us for specific feature ETAs, the questions
kept coming. In an effort to try and curtail this, we toyed with setting a "minimum"
date for the feature and simply doubling it every time the question was asked. This
very quickly led to the date being after the predicted heat death of the universe.
We fell back on a tried and tested response pioneered by id Software; DP Alt Mode will
be done when it's done.

And, well, it's done. Kind of.

> In December, Sven gave a [talk at 39C3](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3OAiOfCcYFM) recounting

Reviewer 2: please use https://media.ccc.de/v/39c3-asahi-linux-porting-linux-to-apple-silicon

observed macOS doing this we cannot yet be certain.

Planes are just one part of the puzzle, however. There is still much work to be
done cleaning up the driver and getting features like HDR into a shippable state.
Watch this space!

## Say cheese!
It's been quite a while since we shipped webcam support, and for _most_ users
it seems to have Just Worked! But not for _all_ users.

Users of certain webcam applications, most notable GNOME's Camera app, have been
reporting severe issues with webcam support since day one. Doing some initial
debugging on this pointed to it being a an issue with GNOME's app, however this
turned out not to be the case. The Asahi OpenGL driver was in fact not handling
planar framebuffer formats correctly. The ISP/webcam exports planar video
framebuffers via V4L2, which must then be consumed and turned into RGB framebuffers
for compositing with the desktop. Apps such as GNOME's Camera app do this with
the GPU, and thus were failing hard. Alyssa R. fixed this [half-asleep on the couch](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/mesa/mesa/-/merge_requests/38160),
in true Alyssa fashion. While looking at Alyssa's fix, Janne noticed that Honeykrisp

> was also lacking support for planar video formats, and [fixed](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/mesa/mesa/-/merge_requests/38200)

Reviewer 2: more like announcing support for planar formats wrongly

that too. In the process of debugging these issues, Robert Mader found
that Fedora was not building GStreamer's gtk4paintablesink plugin with

> Y'CbCr support, which will be fixed for Fedora 44.

Reviewer 2: this is fixed in F43

So all good right? Nope! Hiding behind these bugs in the GPU drivers were two more
bugs, this time in PipeWire. The first was an integer overflow in PipeWire's
GStreamer code, [fixed](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/merge_requests/2582)
by Robert. This then revealed the second bug; the code which determines the latency of a stream was
assuming a period numerator of 1, which is not always the case. With Apple Silicon
machines, the period is expressed as 256/7680, which corresponds to 30 frames per
second. Since the numerator is not 1, the latency calculation was not being normalised,
and thus ended up so long that streams would crash waiting for data from PipeWire.
Janne submitted a [merge request](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/merge_requests/2636)
with a fix, which made it in to Pipewire 1.4.10. Why 256/7680 is not reduced to
1/30 is another mystery that needs solving, however at least now with these two
patches, we're all good right? Right?

So, graphics programming is actually really hard. As it happens, the GPU kernel driver

> was not properly importing DMA-BUFs from external devices. After fixing this and

Reviewer 2: the driver deadlocked when it stopped using the DMA-buf. maybe "not properly handling imported DMA-BUFs"
